---
title: "Ventana"
date: 2026-04-07T15:45:00-04:00
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - ventana
  - library
  - api
  - development
---

Hello hello, friends!

I'm a little late on my goal for monthly blog posts, but I've been very hard at work on a project I've been slowly working on for a few years now. To any new readers,
please bear with me as I am not good at making blog posts.

## [Ventana][ventana]

*Ventana* is a cross-platform, modular, iterator-based windowing library I have been working on for many years now. It started out as an evolution of *Witer*,
which was essentially the same library, but specifically for Win32. I started development on *Witer* to learn Win32 and to solve the issue of traditional
event loops halting when moving/resizing on Windows. In the end, I decided to keep going and make the library cross-platform.

Here is a sample of how to open a simple window using *Ventana*:

```rust
use ventana::prelude::*;

let window = Window::new(WindowOptions::default())?;

for event in window {
  println!("{event:?}");
}
```

### Cross-platform

This point is pretty self-explanatory. *Ventana* is designed to be platform-agnostic to allow users to not need to worry about OS-specific functions. Right now, the "AutoBackend"
only supports Win32 fully and X11 partially, but Wayland and MacOS are planned. I am also investigating supporting the web, but I am still in the planning stages for that.

### Modular

*Ventana* is designed with modularity at its core. Backends for specific operating systems or windowing managers can be swapped out at compile-time or selected at runtime.
This allows for users to replace the default backends with their own or select only the backends they wish to support. This also means that future or niche platforms may be
implemented without needing to wait for first-party support.

```rust
// Adjust AutoBackend selection & order
AutoBackend::set_preferences(&[
  Backend::Win32,
  Backend::AppKit,
  Backend::X11,
  Backend::Wayland,
  Backend::Web,
  Backend::Android,
  Backend::UIKit,
]);

let window = Window::new(
  WindowOptions::default()
    .with_backend(AutoBackend::instance()) // Select whatever specific backend you want
    .with_title("Example")
    .with_size(LogicalSize::new(800, 500))
    .with_clear_color(WindowOptions::BLACK),
)?;
```

### Iterator-based

Iterators are one of Rust's most powerful tools. Window events very naturally fit into the mental model of messages arriving into a window's mailbox. This can be translated
easily to iterators of events pulling from a window. This was most challenging to accomplish with Win32, as I needed to use a separate thread to ensure the events kept flowing.
This required some interesting backpressure and synchronization between the two threads to avoid the window thread outrunning the main thread.

### Summary

I can't wait to see where I take this project in the future, but right now I am extremely tired and honestly somewhat burnt out. I would love to work on this some more sometime
soon, but for now I would love to take a break and work on another project I have in mind. By no means am I abandoning this project, but I have been working on this non-stop for
2 months now and I need some time off!

Until next time...

[ventana]: https://ventana.rs
